Testnet and Vision description (#77)
movementlabsxyz/movement-docs: docs/general/Mainnet/high_level_architecture.md

---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# High-level architecture

![architecture_movement.png](./images/architecture_movement.png)

## Data Availability

The DA service is used to store transaction data and make it available to the network. The service is accessed via [DA light nodes](./node_level_architecture.md#da-light-node).

Celestia is used as the Data Availability (DA) layer.

## Sequencing

> In order to protect the DA layer from spam, only certain [full nodes](./node_level_architecture.md#full-node) receive authorization to sequence transactions in ordered transaction-batches (called proto-blocks). These full nodes provide basic sequencing for transactions ingressed from the users. The full node then sends the proto-block to the DA service using the [DA light node](node_level_architecture.md#da-light-node).

Author: ```suggestion
In order to protect the DA layer from spam, only certain [full nodes](./node_level_architecture.md#full-node) receive authorization to sequence transactions in ordered transaction-batches. These full nodes provide basic sequencing for transactions ingressed from the users. The full node then sends the transaction-batch to the DA service using the [DA light node](node_level_architecture.md#da-light-node).
```

> The DA service sequences the proto-blocks and provides the final ordering of transactions to the network in L2-blocks.

Author: ```suggestion
The DA service sequences transaction batches (which have the form of data blobs). This results in proto-blocks, and where each proto-block may contain several transaction-batches. The proto-block is the final ordering step of transactions. Next stop: execution.

## Execution

The [full node](./node_level_architecture.md#full-node) receives proto-blocks via the [DA light node](node_level_architecture.md#da-light-node) and executes the transactions in the proto-blocks. The full node then creates L2 blocks from the proto-blocks, which contain additional information such as the new state root after applying the transactions.
```

Author: suggesting to add a section on execution, since there should be a step between 
1) the ordered (state-root free) data blob (i.e. protoBlock) that comes from the DA and 
2) the block that is created from this protoBlock. 

Do you think this is somewhat reflected in code?

Reviewer: Yes, all is accurate.

---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# High-level architecture

![Architecture](./images/architecture.png)

> !!! . The node also gets informed from FFS about the finality status, hence the arrow should also go back.

Reviewer 2: @apenzk How do you want to manage these comments?  I suppose these need to be cleared up

Author: yes, they should be managed by answering them before commiting the PR to main :)

Reviewer 2: Probably not the easiest way to manage this, see comments on PR wrt this

!!! . where is the DA light node in this diagram? i assume the DA box is actually two boxes - one for the DA service and one for the DA light node.?

!!! . so Maptos  is the full node / validator node ?

!!! . where is the follower node in this diagram?

!!! . do we really send transactions 1-by-1 to the DA service? or do we send batches of transactions? if blobs, where are they created?

## Data Availability

The DA service is used to store transaction data and make it available to the network. The service is accessed via [DA light nodes](./node_level_architecture.md#da-light-node).

Celestia is used as the Data Availability (DA) layer.

> !!! . do nodes pay fees to celestia? or is how is this rate limited?

Reviewer 2: Should we create a MD for fees, which may well be empty at the moment and link here?

Author: Franck started a MIP: https://github.com/movementlabsxyz/MIP/pull/19/

I added a new section "fees" to address your comment

## Sequencing

In order to protect the DA layer from spam, only certain [full nodes](./node_level_architecture.md#full-node) receive authorization to sequence transactions in ordered transaction-batches (called proto-blocks). These full nodes provide basic sequencing for transactions ingressed from the users. The full node then sends the proto-block to the DA service using the [DA light node](node_level_architecture.md#da-light-node).

The DA service sequences the proto-blocks and provides the final ordering of transactions to the network in L2-blocks.

## Settlement

The network uses the [Fast Finality Settlement Module](../Introduction/technical_details.md#fast-finality-settlement-module) for transaction finality.

> Initially - with the training wheels in place - a specialized node is responsible for updating the state on L1. [Validator nodes](./node_level_architecture.md#validator-node) and [full nodes](./node_level_architecture.md#full-node) check against the recorded state root on L1 to increase their security and reduce the risk of providing wrong state updates to users.

Reviewer 2: @apenzk would it help to give the the specialized node a name here?

Author: ok. called it Core-Validator

> As the training wheels get removed the network will move to a more decentralized model where validators will be able to attest to the correctness of state transitions, and a supermajority of validators will be required to advance the state roots on L1.

Reviewer 2: Is it a decentralized model with the training wheels? How do they differ?

Author: it is not decentralized on the execution side, hence the Core-Validator. it differs by validators being able to attest to the correctness via postconfirmations. 

removed "more" to avoid ambiguity

## Bridge

> !!! . TODO How does the bridge work? 

Reviewer 2: Let me pick this up.  It may well mean a separate document but let's see
